# CS5030 - Class 12 - 2/23/26 Notes

## Announcements

- Mid term exam soon

### Mid Term Exam

- Study openMP and Threads.
- It will be mostly multiple choice, but there will be small code sections where you just put in the blanks.
- Identify critical sections to avoid race conditions
- Syncrhonization mechanisms
- Various openMP directives and syntax
- Scope of variables in openMP
- Threads scheduling
- You have 2 hours which is more than enough.
- Around 10 questions.
- Some of them you should have a piece of paper to draw a diagram like with scheduling
- Take your time

## MPI

- MPI stands for Message Passing Interface
- Common practice to identify processes by ID
- There are multiple MPI packages, and the one we will use is called OpemMPI, which has nothing to do with openMP lol.
- OpenMP is integrated into gcc now so you don't have to do anything special to use it tbh.

- Other implementations include MPICH, and MVAPICH, which are also popular MPI implementations.

- You need an `MPI_Init` function call to initialize the MPI environment, and then you can use other MPI functions to send and receive messages between processors.

  - This is where you start using MPI

- `MPI_Finalize` is used to clean up the MPI environment when you are done using it.

- `MPI_Recv` is used to receive a message from another processor, and `MPI_Send` is used to send a message to another processor.

- `MPI_Comm_rank(MPI_COMM_WORLD, &my_rank)` is used to get the rank of the current process. The rank is a unique identifier for each process, and it is used to determine which process is which when sending and receiving messages.

- `MPI_Comm_size(MPI_COMM_WORLD, &num_procs)` is used to get the total number of processes in the MPI environment. This is useful for determining how many processes are available to send and receive messages.

- What is MPI_COMM_WORLD?
  - Its called a communicator, and it is a group of processes that can communicate with each other. MPI_COMM_WORLD is the default communicator that includes all the processes in the MPI environment.
  - Is this like the interconnect? no the communicator uses the interconnect to send messages between processes, but it is not the interconnect itself. The interconnect is the hardware that allows the processes to communicate with each other, while the communicator is a software construct that defines which processes can communicate with each other.

### Communication

```c

int MPI_Send(
    void* msg_buf_p,
    int msg_count,
    MPI_Datatype msg_type,
    int dest_rank,
    int tag,
    MPI_Comm communicator
)
```

```c
int MPI_Recv(
    void* msg_buf_p,
    int buf_size,
    MPI_Datatype msg_type,
    int source_rank,
    int tag,
    MPI_Comm communicator,
    MPI_Status* status
)
```

### MPI Datatypes

- MPI provides a set of predefined datatypes that can be used to specify the type of data being sent or received in MPI communication functions. These datatypes include:

  - `MPI_CHAR`: Represents a character data type.
  - `MPI_INT`: Represents an integer data type.
  - `MPI_FLOAT`: Represents a floating-point data type.
  - `MPI_DOUBLE`: Represents a double-precision floating-point data type.
  - `MPI_LONG`: Represents a long integer data type.
  - `MPI_SHORT`: Represents a short integer data type.
  - `MPI_BYTE`: Represents a byte data type, which can be used for sending raw data.

### Message Matching

- The receive command and send command should match in terms of their src/dest send/receive tag, and communicator. If they don't match, the message will not be received and the program may hang or crash.

- A reciever can get a message without knowing:
  1. The amount of data in the message
  2. The sender of the message
  3. The tag of the message

- When the receiving order is hard to be maintained the MPI_recv can use a wildcard argument for:
  - source: `MPI_ANY_SOURCE`
  - tag: `MPI_ANY_TAG`

- the `MPI_Status`  is used as an arg for `MPI_Recv` to get that information about the message that was recieved.

- `MPI_Get_count` is used to get the number of elements received in a message.

```c
int MPI_Get_count(
    MPI_Status* status_p,
    MPI_Datatype type, 
    int* count_p
)
```

#### Issues with send and recieve

- Exact behavior is determined by the MPI Implementation
- `MPI_Send` May behave differently with regard to buffer size, cutoffs, and blocking
- `MPI_Recv` always blocks until a matching message is received
- **KNOW YOUR IMPLEMENTATION, DON'T MAKE ASSUMPTIONS**

### Trapezoidal Rule in MPI

- Serial program:

```c
h = (b - a) / n;
approx = (f(a) + f(b)) / 2.0;
for (i = 1; i < n; i++) {
    x_i = a + i * h;
    approx += f(x_i);
}
approx *= h;
```

- We can parallelize this with MPI Psuedo code:

```c
get a, b, n;
h = (b - a) / n;
local n = n / num_procs;
local a = a + my_rank * n * h;
local b = a + n * h;
local_integral = Trap(local a, local b, local n, h);
if (my_rank != 0) {
    MPI_Send(&local_integral, 1, MPI_DOUBLE, 0, 0, MPI_COMM_WORLD);
} else {
    total_integral = local_integral;
    for (i = 1; i < num_procs; i++) {
        MPI_Recv(&local_integral, 1, MPI_DOUBLE, i, 0, MPI_COMM_WORLD, &status);
        total_integral += local_integral;
    }
    if (my_rank == 0) {
        printf("Total Integral: %f\n", total_integral);
    }
}
```

- We need to send a message to process 0 because we don't have the global variabes. So if we are not rank 0 we need to sent amessage to rank 0 with our local_integral.

- Rank 0 will recieve the local_integral from all the other processes and add them together to get the total_integral.

- This means that rank 0 will have the result, so its the only one who can print it

- Full implementation:

```c

int main(void){
    int my_rank, comm_sz, n = 1024, local_n;
    double a = 0.0, b = 3.0, h, local_a, local_b;
    double local_int, total_int;
    int source;

    MPI_Init(NULL, NULL);
    MPI_Comm_rank(MPI_COMM_WORLD, &my_rank);
    MPI_Comm_size(MPI_COMM_WORLD, &comm_sz);

    h = (b - a) / n;
    local_n = n / comm_sz;
    local_a = a + my_rank * local_n * h;
    local_b = local_a + local_n * h;
    local_int = Trap(local_a, local_b, local_n, h);

    if (my_rank != 0) {
        MPI_Send(&local_int, 1, MPI_DOUBLE, 0, 0, MPI_COMM_WORLD);
        // We are sending our local_integral, 1 element, of type MPI_DOUBLE, to process 0 with tag 0 and using the MPI_COMM_WORLD communicator
    } else {
        total_int = local_int;
        for (source = 1; source < comm_sz; source++) {
            MPI_Recv(&local_int, 1, MPI_DOUBLE, source, 0, MPI_COMM_WORLD, MPI_STATUS_IGNORE);
            // We are recieving a message from the process source, we are recieving local_integral, 1 element, of type MPI_DOUBLE, with tag 0 and using the MPI_COMM_WORLD communicator. We are ignoring the status of the message.
            total_int += local_int;
            // We then take the local int and add it to total int (ONLY THREAD 0 CAN DO THIS)
        }
        // Only Rank 0
        if (my_rank == 0) {
            printf("With n = %d trapezoids, our estimate of the integral from %f to %f is %f\n", n, a, b, total_int);
        }
    }
    MPI_Finalize(); // We need to finalize the MPI environment when we are done using it.
    return 0;
}
```

- Busy waiting was incorrect on homework 3 because it is not a good way to synchronize processes. You should have instead use a barrier struct.

### Inputs and Outputs of MPI Programs

- Most MPI implementations only allow process 0 in `MPI_COMM_WORLD` access to stdin.

- Process 0 must read the data (scanf) and send to the other processes.

- So, the assumption is only process 0 has access to stdin

```c
if(my_rank == 0){
    printf("Enter a, b, and n\n");
    scanf("%lf %lf %d", &a, &b, &n);
    for (dest = 1; dest < comm_sz; dest++){
        MPI_Send(&a, 1, MPI_DOUBLE, dest, 0, MPI_COMM_WORLD);
        MPI_Send(&b, 1, MPI_DOUBLE, dest, 0, MPI_COMM_WORLD);
        MPI_Send(&n, 1, MPI_INT, dest, 0, MPI_COMM_WORLD);
    }

}else{
    MPI_Recv(&a, 1, MPI_DOUBLE, 0, 0, MPI_COMM_WORLD, MPI_STATUS_IGNORE);
    MPI_Recv(&b, 1, MPI_DOUBLE, 0, 0, MPI_COMM_WORLD, MPI_STATUS_IGNORE);
    MPI_Recv(&n, 1, MPI_INT, 0, 0, MPI_COMM_WORLD, MPI_STATUS_IGNORE);
}
```

- This is one of the problems of send and receive.
- In this code we have process 0 read the data and then sends it to all the other processes.
- There must be someway to do communication a bit faster when it involves a large number of processes.

- This type of communication is called point to point communication. LEts talk about collective communication, which is when we want to send a message to all processes at once. This is called a broadcast.

### Collective Communication

1. Phase 1
    - Each process sends its data to a designated parent process.
2. Phase 2
    - The parent process collects data from its children and sends it to its parent.

- `MPI_Reduce` is a collective communication function that performs a reduction operation (such as sum, max, min, etc.) on data from all processes and returns the result to a designated root process.

```c

MPI_Reduce(
    void* input_data,
    void* output_data,
    int count,
    MPI_Datatype datatype,
    MPI_Op op,
    int dest_process,
    MPI_Comm comm
)

MPI_Reduce(&local_int, &total_int, 1, MPI_DOUBLE, MPI_SUM, 0, MPI_COMM_WORLD);

```

- Operations:
  - MPI_MAX: Maximum value
  - MPI_MIN: Minimum value
  - MPI_SUM: Sum of values
  - MPI_PROD: Product of values

- The difference between this and send/recv is that this has all the processes call the same collective function.

- For example, a program that attempts to match a call to MPI_Reduce on one process with a call to MPI_Recv on another process is errorneous and will crash. All processes must call the same collective function, and they must all call it in the same order.

- Example of where to use MPI_Reduce:

```c
local_int = Trap(local_a, local_b, local_n, h);
MPI_Reduce(&local_int, &total_int, 1, MPI_DOUBLE, MPI_SUM, 0, MPI_COMM_WORLD);
if (my_rank == 0) {
    printf("With n = %d trapezoids, our estimate of the integral from %f to %f is %f\n", n, a, b, total_int);
}
```

- In this example we use MPI_Reduce to sum up the local integrals from all the processes and store the result in total_int on process 0. This is much more efficient than using send and receive to collect the local integrals from all the processes.

- This prevents us from having to send multiple messages to process 0.

- The `output_data_p` argument in `MPI_Reduce` is only used on `dest_process`

- For example in the previous code snippet, output_data_p is defined as `total_int`, but only process 0 will have the result of the reduction operation stored in `total_int`. The other processes will not have any meaningful value in `total_int` after the call to `MPI_Reduce`.

- We want a collective call to be the same for every process.

#### Multiple calls to MPI_Reduce

- The first argument is local, the second argument is global. Input and output. The output is only valid on the dest_process.

|Time|Process 0|Process 1|Process 2|
|-|-|-|-|
|0|a = 1, c = 2|a = 1, c = 2|a = 1, c = 2|
|1|MPI_Reduce(&a, &b, 1, MPI_INT, MPI_SUM, 0, MPI_COMM_WORLD)|MPI_Reduce(&c, &d, 1, MPI_INT, MPI_SUM, 0, MPI_COMM_WORLD)|MPI_Reduce(&a, &b, 1, MPI_INT, MPI_SUM, 0, MPI_COMM_WORLD)|
|2|MPI_Reduce(&c, &d, 1, MPI_INT, MPI_SUM, 0, MPI_COMM_WORLD)|MPI_Reduce(&a, &b, 1, MPI_INT, MPI_SUM, 0, MPI_COMM_WORLD)|MPI_Reduce(&c, &d, 1, MPI_INT, MPI_SUM, 0, MPI_COMM_WORLD)|

- In this table you can see in row one that Process 0 and Process 2 uses A and B and Process 1 uses C and D. In the second row, process 0 and 2 use c and d, and process 1 uses a and b. This is an example of how the collective calls must be the same for all processes, but the local variables can be different.
- This will not cause a problem because the collective calls are still the same for all processes, they are just using different local variables. The important thing is that all processes call the same collective function in the same order.

- Row 1 results:
  - 1 -> 1
  - 2 -> 2
  - 3 -> 1
- This is because the first call to MPI_Reduce sums up the values of a from all processes and stores the result in b on process 0. The second call to MPI_Reduce sums up the values of c from all processes and stores the result in d on process 0. The order of the calls is the same for all processes, so there is no problem with using different local variables.

### MPI_Allreduce

- MPI Allreduce is another collection communication form thats different from MPI_Reduce in that it returns the result of the reduction operation to ALL processes, not just the dest_process.

- This can be useful if the other processes need to use the result of the reduction operation for further computation.

- it does also use a tree based approach to perform the reduction operation, but it also includes an additional step to broadcast the result to all processes after the reduction is complete.

### MPI_Bcast

- Another collective communication function is MPI_Bcast, which is used to broadcast a message from one process to all other processes in the communicator.

```c
int MPI_Bcast(
    void* data,
    int count,
    MPI_Datatype datatype,
    int source_process,
    MPI_Comm comm
)
```

- One process will act as a sender (`source_process`) and will send the data to all other processes in the communicator. The other processes will receive the data and store it in the `data` buffer.

- MPI_Bcast is like the end portion of MPI_Allreduce, in the sense that it broadcasts the result to all processes. Which it does, in a tree based approach.

```c
if (my_rank == 0) {
    printf("Enter a, b, and n\n");
    scanf("%lf %lf %d", &a, &b, &n);
}
MPI_Bcast(&a, 1, MPI_DOUBLE, 0, MPI_COMM_WORLD);
MPI_Bcast(&b, 1, MPI_DOUBLE, 0, MPI_COMM_WORLD);
MPI_Bcast(&n, 1, MPI_INT, 0, MPI_COMM_WORLD);
```

- This example broadcasts all the shared variables from process 0 to all the other processes. This is more efficient than using send and receive to send the variables to all the other processes.

### MPI_Scatter

- Similar to `MPI_Bcast`, `MPI_Scatter` is a collective communication function that is used to distribute data from one process to all other processes in the communicator. However, instead of broadcasting the same data to all processes, `MPI_Scatter` divides the data into equal parts and sends each part to a different process.

```c
int MPI_Scatter(
    void* send_data,
    int send_count,
    MPI_Datatype send_datatype,
    void* recv_data,
    int recv_count,
    MPI_Datatype recv_datatype,
    int source_process,
    MPI_Comm comm
)
```

- The `send_data` buffer contains the data to be sent, which is divided into `send_count` elements of type `send_datatype`. The `recv_data` buffer is where each process will receive its portion of the data, which is `recv_count` elements of type `recv_datatype`. The `source_process` is the process that holds the data to be scattered.

```c
if (my_rank == 0){
    a = malloc(n*sizeof(double));
    printf("Enter %d values for a\n", n);
    for (i = 0; i < n; i++){
        scanf("%lf", &a[i]);
    
    }
    MPI_Scatter(a, local_n, MPI_DOUBLE, local_a, local_n, MPI_DOUBLE, 0, MPI_COMM_WORLD);
}else{
    MPI_Scatter(NULL, local_n, MPI_DOUBLE, local_a, local_n, MPI_DOUBLE, 0, MPI_COMM_WORLD);
}
```

- This is something you will prolly have to use in the homework.
- In this example, process 0 reads an array of `n` double values into the `a` buffer and then uses `MPI_Scatter` to distribute the data to all processes. Each process receives a portion of the data into its `local_a` buffer. The other processes call `MPI_Scatter` with a `NULL` send buffer since they are not sending any data, but they still receive their portion of the data from process 0.
- The portion of data each process receives is determined by `local_n`, which is typically calculated as `n / comm_sz` to ensure that the data is evenly distributed among the processes.

### MPI_Scatterv

- Similar to MPI_Scatter, MPI_Scatterv is a collective communication function that allows for variable amounts of data to be sent to each process. This is useful when the data to be scattered is not evenly divisible by the number of processes.

```c
int MPI_Scatterv(
    void* send_data,
    int* send_counts,
    int* displs,
    MPI_Datatype send_datatype,
    void* recv_data,
    int recv_count,
    MPI_Datatype recv_datatype,
    int source_process,
    MPI_Comm comm
)
```

- `send_data`: address of send buffer
- `send_counts`: array of integers specifying the number of elements to send to each process
- `displs`: array of integers specifying the displacement (offset) from the start of the send buffer for each process
- `send_datatype`: data type of the send buffer elements
- `recv_data`: address of receive buffer
- `recv_count`: number of elements in the receive buffer
- `recv_datatype`: data type of the receive buffer elements
- `source_process`: rank of the process that holds the data to be scattered
- `comm`: communicator

### MPI_Gather

- THe opposite of `MPI_Scatter` is `MPI_Gather`, which is a collective communication function that is used to gather data from all processes in the communicator to a single process.

```c
int MPI_Gather(
    void* send_data,
    int send_count,
    MPI_Datatype send_datatype,
    void* recv_data,
    int recv_count,
    MPI_Datatype recv_datatype,
    int dest_process,
    MPI_Comm comm
)
```

- `send_data`: address of send buffer
- `send_count`: number of elements in the send buffer
- `send_datatype`: data type of the send buffer elements
- `recv_data`: address of receive buffer (only significant at dest_process)
- `recv_count`: number of elements received from each process (only significant at dest_process)
- `recv_datatype`: data type of the receive buffer elements (only significant at dest_process)
- `dest_process`: rank of the process that will receive the gathered data
- `comm`: communicator

- Example (Print vector):

```c
if (my_rank == 0) {
    b = malloc(n * sizeof(double));
    MPI_Gather(local_b, local_n, MPI_DOUBLE, b, local_n, MPI_DOUBLE, 0, MPI_COMM_WORLD);
    printf("The vector is:\n");
    for (i = 0; i < n; i++) {
        printf("%f ", b[i]);
    }
    printf("\n");
}
```

- In this example process 0 is creating a buffer `b` to receive the gathered data from all processes. Each process sends its portion of the data in `local_b` to process 0 using `MPI_Gather`. Process 0 then prints the gathered vector.

### MPI_Allgather

- Similar to `MPI_Gather`, `MPI_Allgather` is a collective communication function that gathers data from all processes in the communicator and distributes the result to all processes.

```c
int MPI_Allgather(
    void* send_data,
    int send_count,
    MPI_Datatype send_datatype,
    void* recv_data,
    int recv_count,
    MPI_Datatype recv_datatype,
    MPI_Comm comm
)
```

- `send_data`: address of send buffer
- `send_count`: number of elements in the send buffer
- `send_datatype`: data type of the send buffer elements
- `recv_data`: address of receive buffer (must be large enough to hold data from all processes)
- `recv_count`: number of elements received from each process (must be the same for all processes)
- `recv_datatype`: data type of the receive buffer elements
- `comm`: communicator
