# CS5030 - Class 13 - 2/25/26 Notes

## Announcements

* Exam next week
* Get started on homework early because its hard

### Distributed Memory Programming Continued.

* MPI provides collective communication and also point-to-point communication.
* Point-to-point communication is more flexible but more difficult to use.
* Collective communication is easier to use but less flexible.

* Remember to use the `MPI_Reduce` to calculate data that is distrubuted for example, calculating trapazoidal rule problems.

* Its like summing up cells in excel. you are using `MPI_Reduce` and `MPI_SUM` to sum up the cells from different processes.

```c
MPI_Reduce(&local_int, &global_int, 1, MPI_INT, MPI_SUM, 0, MPI_COMM_WORLD);
```

* `&local_int` is the address of the local integer that each process has.
* `&global_int` is the address of the global integer that will hold the result of the reduction.
* `1` is the number of elements to be reduced.
* `MPI_INT` is the data type of the elements to be reduced.
* `MPI_SUM` is the operation to be performed on the elements to be reduced.
* `0` is the rank of the root process that will receive the result of the reduction.
* `MPI_COMM_WORLD` is the communicator that includes all the processes.

* What happens If I have rank 0 and Rank 1
  * Rank 0 has a send operation to rank 1
  * Then it has an MPI_Reduce
  * rank 1 does reduce, and then receive.
  * what happens in this scenario?
* The receive instruction can be blocking. TThis program could get stuck here because it never receives the message from rank 0. The other problem is that receive succeeds but we get the wrong data because the reduce operation is not completed. This is a common problem in distributed memory programming. We have to be careful about the order of operations and the synchronization of processes.
* Remember only rank 0 has access to the console.


#### MPI_Scatter

* `MPI_Scatter` is used to distribute data from one process (the root) to all other processes in a communicator.
* The root process sends a different portion of the data to each process in the communicator.
* Each process receives its portion of the data and can work on it independently.
* The syntax for `MPI_Scatter` is as follows:

```c
MPI_Scatter(sendbuf, sendcount, sendtype, recvbuf, recvcount, recvtype, root, comm);
```

* `sendbuf` is the address of the send buffer (data to be sent).
* `sendcount` is the number of elements to be sent to each process.
* `sendtype` is the data type of the elements in the send buffer.
* `recvbuf` is the address of the receive buffer (where the received data will be stored).
* `recvcount` is the number of elements to be received by each process.
* `recvtype` is the data type of the elements in the receive buffer.
* `root` is the rank of the root process that is sending the data.
* `comm` is the communicator that includes all the processes.

* `MPI_Scatterv` is a variant of `MPI_Scatter` that allows for variable send counts and displacements for each process. This is useful when the amount of data to be sent to each process is not the same.

```c
MPI_Scatterv(sendbuf, sendcounts, displs, sendtype, recvbuf, recvcount, recvtype, root, comm);
```

* `sendcounts` is an array that specifies the number of elements to be sent to each process.
* `displs` is an array that specifies the displacement (offset) in the send buffer from which to take the data for each process.

`MPI_Allgather` is used to gather data from all processes and distribute the combined data back to all processes. Each process sends its data to all other processes, and each process receives the combined data from all processes.

```c
MPI_Allgather(sendbuf, sendcount, sendtype, recvbuf, recvcount, recvtype, comm);
```

* `sendbuf` is the address of the send buffer (data to be sent).
* `sendcount` is the number of elements to be sent by each process.
* `sendtype` is the data type of the elements in the send buffer.
* `recvbuf` is the address of the receive buffer (where the combined data will be stored).
* `recvcount` is the number of elements to be received from each process.
* `recvtype` is the data type of the elements in the receive buffer.
* `comm` is the communicator that includes all the processes.

#### Matrix Vector Multiplication

* What would you use to do matrix vector multiplication in parallel?

##### Option 1

* Use broadcast and gather. Broadcast the vector to all processes and then gather the results back to the root process.

* Not the best solution because we don't need the entire matrix everywhere.

##### Option 2

* Use scatter and gather. Scatter the matrix to all processes and then gather the results back to the root process.

* This is important for knowing in your project. You should assume that data is distrubuted. Data should not be replicated everywhere. Broadcast can still be useful here though. For what.

* Broadcast can be used to send the second vector to all processes because everybody needs a copy of it to do the multiplication.

### MPI Derived Data Types

* Derived data types are used to represent any collection of data items in memory by storing both the types of the items and their location in memory.
* The idea is that if a function that sends data knows this information about a collection of data items, it can collect the items from memory before they are sent
* Similarly, if a function that receives data knows this information about a collection of data items, it can scatter the items to memory after they are received.

* Formally, consists of a sequence of basic MPI data types together with a displacement for each of the datatypes.

* Trapezoidal Rule Example:
  * {(MPI_DOUBLE, 0), (MPI_DOUBLE, 16), (MPI_DOUBLE, 32)}
    * This means that we have three double precision floating point numbers that are located at offsets 0, 16, and 32 bytes from the start of the data structure.

```c
int MPI_Type_create_struct(
    int count,
    int array_of_blocklengths[],
    MPI_Aint* array_of_displacements[],
    MPI_Datatype array_of_types[],
    MPI_Datatype* new_type_p
);
```

* `count` is the number of blocks in the new data type.
* `array_of_blocklengths` is an array that specifies the number of elements in each block.
* `array_of_displacements` is an array that specifies the displacement (offset) in bytes of each block from the start of the data structure.
* `array_of_types` is an array that specifies the MPI data type of each block.
* `new_type_p` is a pointer to the new data type that will be created.

#### MPI_Type_commit

* After creating a new data type, you need to commit it before you can use it in communication operations.
* This is so every process can know about the new data type and how to use it.

```c
int MPI_Type_commit(MPI_Datatype* datatype);
```

```c
void Build_mpi_type(
    double* a_p,
    double* b_p,
    int* n_p,
    MPI_Datatype* mpi_type_p
)

MPI_Datatype mpi_type;
MPI_Aint a_address, b_address, n_address;
int blocklengths[3] = {1, 1, 1};
MPI_Get_address(a_p, &a_address);
MPI_Get_address(b_p, &b_address);
MPI_Get_address(n_p, &n_address);
array_of_displacements[1] = b_address - a_address;
array_of_displacements[2] = n_address - a_address;
MPI_Type_create_struct(3, blocklengths, array_of_displacements, array_of_types, &mpi_type);
MPI_Type_commit(&mpi_type);
```

* This code creates a new MPI data type that consists of three blocks: a double precision floating point number for `a`, a double precision floating point number for `b`, and an integer for `n`. The displacements are calculated based on the addresses of the variables in memory. After creating the new data type, it is committed so that it can be used in communication operations.
* After a, the next location is b, and after b, the next location is n. So we can calculate the displacements based on the addresses of a, b, and n in memory. This allows us to create a new data type that represents the combination of these three variables, which can be useful for sending and receiving them together in MPI communication operations.
* Kind of like classes..... but not really, we are just grouping data together, not creating objects/instances.

* Once this is completed and created we can use this datatype the same way we used to use the basic MPI data types

```c
MPI_Bcast(a_p, 1, mpi_type, 0, MPI_COMM_WORLD);
```

* Instead of saying MPI_DOUBLE, we can now say mpi_type, which represents the combination of a, b, and n. This allows us to broadcast all three variables together in one communication operation, which can be more efficient than broadcasting them separately.

#### MPI_Wtime

* `MPI_Wtime` is a function that returns the elapsed wall clock time in seconds since some arbitrary point in the past. It is used to measure the time taken by a section of code or an entire program.

```c
double start_time, end_time;
start_time = MPI_Wtime();
// Code to be timed goes here
end_time = MPI_Wtime();
double elapsed_time = end_time - start_time;
```

* This is similar to openMP's `omp_get_wtime`
* You can use MPI_Wtime with a reduce and max operation to find the maximum time taken by any process in a parallel program, which can be useful for performance analysis and optimization.

```c
double local_start = MPI_Wtime();
// Code to be timed goes here
double local_end = MPI_Wtime();
local_elapsed_time = local_end - local_start;
double global_time;
MPI_Reduce(&local_elapsed_time, &global_time, 1, MPI_DOUBLE, MPI_MAX, 0, MPI_COMM_WORLD);

if (rank == 0) {
    printf("Maximum time taken by any process: %f seconds\n", global_time);
}
```

#### MPI_Barrier

* `MPI_Barrier` is a synchronization function that blocks the calling process until all processes in the communicator have reached the barrier. It is used to ensure that all processes have completed a certain section of code before any process continues.

```c
MPI_Barrier(MPI_COMM_WORLD);
```

* This is a typical barrier in parralel programming used to make sure all processes are in sync before moving on.

### Scalability

* A program is scalable if the problem size can be increased at a rate so that the efficiency doesn't decrease as the number of processes increase.
* Programs that can maintain a constant efficiency without increasing the problem size are sometimes say to be "strongly scalable.
  * Problem size is FIXED
* Programs that can maintain a constant efficiency if the problem size increases at the same rate as the number of processes are sometimes said to be "weakly scalable."
  * Increasing both the number of processes AND the problem size

* Remember, $E = \frac{S}{P}$

### Sorting

* n keys and p = comm sz processes
* n/p keys per process
* No restrictions on which keys are assigned to which processes
* When the algorithm terminates:
  * The keys assigned to each process should be sorted in ascending order
    * The keys assigned to process i should be less than the keys assigned to process j
* We can use the odd-even transposition sort algorithm to sort the keys in parallel. This algorithm works by comparing and swapping adjacent keys in a series of iterations until the keys are sorted.
* Lets assum the data is not available on every process.

* psuedo code for odd-even transposition sort:

```pseudocode
Sort local keys;
for (phase = 0; phase < comm_sz; phase++) {
    partner = compute_partner(phase, rank, comm_sz);
    send my keys to partner
    recieve partner's keys
if (my_rank < partner){
    keey smaller keys
} else {
    keep larger keys

}
```

