# CS3430 Class 3 - 1/12/26 Notes

## Announcements

* Homework 1 is due on saturday at 11:59 PM.
* Read the pdfs
* Ai use is allowed
* Covers lecture 1 and 2

### Numerical Differentiation Review

* Remember the definition of a derivative:
  * $f'(x) = \lim_{h \to 0} \dfrac{f(x+h) - f(x)}{h}$
* To find the CDD ( Central Divided Difference) we use:
  * $f'(x) \approx \dfrac{f(x+h) - f(x-h)}{2h}$

* Two types of error:
  * Truncation Error: Error due to approximating a mathematical procedure
  * Rounding Error: Error due to representing numbers in a computer

* Richardson Extrapolation Formula:
  * $A(h/2) = A* + C(h)^p + O$(some big O quantity)
  * $A(h/2)$ is a quantity, not a function
  * $A*$ is the ideal value we want to approximate
  * $C$ is a constant
  * $h$ is the step size
  * $p$ is the order of the error term

* Example:
  * $A* = \dfrac{2^p A(h/2) - A(h)}{2^p - 1}$
  * This is a better approximation of the derivative than just using CDD alone.

  * $f'(x) \approx \dfrac{4D(h/2) - D(h)}{3}$ for p = 2
  * This problem is on the homework

  ### Numerical Differention Continued

  * $A* = 2^p A(h/2) - A(h) / (2^p - 1)$
  * This was made in the 1950s
  * Ronberg = Richardson / On Trap

## Integration Aproximations

### Trapazoidal Rule

* integral from a to b of f(x) dx = Tn = h/2 [ f(a) + 2 sum from i=1 to n-1 of f(xi) + f(b) ]
* in markdown/latex integral is written as \int
* $\int_a^b f(x) dx \approx T_n = \dfrac{h}{2} \left[ f(a) + 2 \sum_{i=1}^{n-1} f(x_i) + f(b) \right]$
* This is the Trapezoidal Rule, he will refer to this as Trap
* THis is called the ronberg trapazoidal approximation

### Ronberg Recurrence Relation

* $n = 1, 2, 2^2, 2^3, ...$
* This is the Ronberg recurrence relation

1. Base Case = $R_{k,0} = T_{2^k}, k \geq 0$
2. $R_{k,j} = R_{k,j-1} + \dfrac{R_{k,j-1} - R_{k-1,j-1}}{4^{j-1}}$

* Once we have computed the trapezoidal approximations, we can use the Ronberg recurrence relation to get better approximations of the integral.
* YOu may find different formulas, but this is the one we will use.

### Example of Ronberg Recurrence Relation

* What is it that we are doing? Approximating definite integrals.
* **Please see paper notes for more examples and details. (Line 66)**

* $h = \dfrac{b-a}{2}$

* Continue here from hand written notes.
* You will have to implement this using recursion on the homework
* Do it level by level
* First compute the first level, and file away in a matrix
* Then compute the second level using the first level, then file away in a matrix
* And so on until you reach the end
* The maximum number of nodes is 5, so you will have a 5x5 matrix

* **Please see paper notes for more examples and details. (Line 78)**

* THis works well if the function is smooth
* If the function is not smooth, you are FUCKED!
* This is in lecture 2 pdf

* See what the behavior is like on YOUR machine
* His hope is its in the same ballpark as his machine
* fuck linked lists all my homies hate linked lists
* They are the worst data structure for this kind of problem
* Use arrays instead

## Analyzing Sympy vs Numpy

* **Please see paper notes for more examples and details. (Line 92)**

* The paper notes solve a problem by hand. Here is how you solve that problem using sympy:

```python



import sympy as sp

theta = sp.symbols('theta', positive=True, real=True)
a = sp.symbols('a', Positive=True, real=True)
b = 2 * a * sp.sin(theta/2)
c = (b/4) * sp.sqrt(4* a**2 - b**2)
i = (sp.pi/2) * (b/2)**2
```

To be continued........