# CS3430 - Class 7 - 1/28/26 Notes

## Announcements

- Game jam on friday, you don't have homework due on friday, so come to the game jam! (no)
- Homework 3 due on sunday at 11:59pm. (Already done)

## Transcendental Mediation $\pi$, e, etc.

### NRA (Newton Raphson Approximation)

- Not national rifle association
- Newton Raphson Approximation is a method for finding roots of a function.
- Given a function f(x), we want to find x such that f(x) = 0.
- Example:
  - $f(x) = a_nx^n + a_{n-1}x^{n-1} + ... + a_1x + a_0$
  - $f'(0) = 0$

  - $x_i = x_{i-1} - \frac{f(x_{i-1})}{f'(x_{i-1})}, i > 0$
  - This is essentially question one on homework 3. (Due saturday)

### Solving Linear Systems

- Essentially problem 2 on homework 3.
- Do it in 2 ways
    1. guassian elimination
    2. least squares

- Guassian Elimination
  - `np.linalg.solve(A, b)` (super easy, does guassian elimination under the hood)

- Least Squares
  - `np.linalg.lstsq(A, b)` (also super easy, does least squares under the hood)

- If you are doing linear algebra in a noisy enviroment, like robotics, doing embedded systems, you can apply guassian elimination, but if it throws an error, like the determinant is 0, then you can attempt to solve it using least squares, which is more robust to noise, and it always returns a solution, and thats better than nothing.

### Edge Detection / Image Processing

- You will be given 2 kernals, they are sobel like kernals.
  - $K_x = \begin{bmatrix} -1 & 0 & 1 \\ -2 & 0 & 2 \\ -1 & 0 & 1 \end{bmatrix}$ Horizontal Edge Detection

  - $K_y = \begin{bmatrix} -1 & -2 & -1 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 \\ 1 & 2 & 1 \end{bmatrix}$ Vertical Edge Detection

- Strong horizontal response means that pixel is likely part of a vertical edge.
- Strong vertical response means that pixel is likely part of a horizontal edge.

- Formula:
  - $g(x) = \sum_{i=1}^{B} \sum_{j=1}^{B} K_x[i, j] * I_{patch}[i, j]$
  - $g(y) = \sum_{i=1}^{B} \sum_{j=1}^{B} K_y[i, j] * I_{patch}[i, j]$

- Doing this in python:

  - Lets say you have these edges in an image:
    - 12 12 13 200 201
    - 11 13 15 202 203
    - 11 13 15 205 207
    - 10 11 12 208 210
    - 9 10 11 211 212
  - Obviously there is a vertical edge between columns 3 and 4.
  - We know that 0 or close to 0 is black, and 255 is white, this is done for gray scale images.
  - Lets center our filter on the middle pixel, which is 2,2 (15, 0 indexed)
  - The kernal alignment looks like this (I patch):
    - 13 14 202
    - 13 15 205
    - 11 12 208
  - $G(x) = (-1 * 13) + (0 * 14) + (1 * 202) +$
  - $(-2 * 13) + (0 * 15) + (2 * 205) +$
  -  $(-1 * 11) + (0 * 12) + (1 * 208) = 770$
  - You are basically dot producting the kernal with the image patch.
  - A strong response in G(x) mean there is a strong vertical edge here.

  - $G(y) = (-1 * 13) + (-2 * 14) + (-1 * 202) +$
  - $(0 * 13) + (0 * 15) + (0 * 205) +$
  -  $(1 * 11) + (2 * 12) + (1 * 208) = 0$
  - We have a very weak response in the y direction, which means there is no horizontal edge here.

### Polygon Approximation of $\pi$

- $\pi$ can be calculated using the following formula:
  - $\pi = \frac{c}{d}$
  - $\pi = \frac{c}{2}$
  - $2\pi = c$
  - Where c is the circumference of a circle, and d is the diameter of a circle
  - If we have a square, we can draw a circle around it and cross in the middle.
    - This gives us $\pi_n=4$ this is our input
    - our output is $p_n = 4$

- In the unit circle $P_n^{in} \leq 2\pi = c \leq P_n^{out}$
  - $P_n^{in} = 2 * n * sin(\frac{\pi}{n})$
  - $P_n^{out} = 2 * n * tan(\frac{\pi}{n})$
  - As n approaches infinity, both of these approach $2\pi$

- Example:
  - $\frac{p_6^{in}}{2} \leq \pi \leq \frac{p_6^{out}}{2}$
    - $\frac{p_6^{in}}{2} = \frac{6 *1}{2} = 3$
    - $tan(30) = \frac{|AM|}{|OM|} = tan(30) = |AM|$
    - $|AM| = tan(30) = \frac{1}{\sqrt{3}}$
    - $|AB| = \frac{2}{\sqrt{3}}$
    - $P_6^{out} = 6 * \frac{2}{\sqrt{3}} = \frac{12}{\sqrt{3}} * \frac{\sqrt{3}}{\sqrt{3}} = \frac{12\sqrt{3}}{3} = 4\sqrt{3}$
    - The generic formula can be derived that computes the length of the next side, given the previous side length. Its iterative.
    - The formulas will be stated without derivation. Unless you are mathematically inclined and want to see the derivation, but I'm not a fucking nerd, you are.
    - None of this makes sense to me tbh. but, thats ok. for now. mwahahahahahahahaha you are cooked.

### Polygon Approximation of $\pi$ Part 2

- $S_n$ - The side of $P_n^{in}$
- $T_n$ - The side of $P_n^{out}$
- $n=6, S_6 = 1, T_6 = \frac{2}{\sqrt{3}}$
- now we need a while loop for this shit

```python
n = 6
S_n = 1.0
T_n = 2 / math.sqrt(3)
while loop:
    n *= 2 * n
```

- But it keeps going
- The following is still inside the while loop
  - $S_{2n} = \sqrt{2 - \sqrt{4 - S_n^2}}$
  - $T_{2n} = \frac{4\sqrt{1 + \frac{T_n^2}{4}} - 1}{T_n}$

### History of Mathematics books

- Archimedes (287 BC - 212 BC)
  - "The Method of Mechanical Theorems"
  - He was killed
  - Born in modern day sicily
- Euclid (circa 300 BC)
  - "Book of Elements"
  - Book I, Proposition 37 which is the Pythagorean Theorem (wow that's cool)
  