# CS3430 - Class 13 - 2/23/26

## Annoucenments

- THis lecture will be split into 2 parts due to class be cancelled last wednesday due to snow. The first part will be about random number generation and the second part will be about the project.

## Random Number Generation

---

### RNG Time Line

1. 1958 - Linear Congruential Generator (LCG)
2. 1968 - Weaknesses of LCG discovered 
3. 1998 - Mersenne Twister (MT) developed
4. 2014 - PCG (Permuted Congruential Generator) developed

- Python uses Mersenne Twister (MT) for its random number generation.
- Nnumpy uses PCG for its random number generation.
- Use numpy because its bleeding edge and faster than python's built in random number generator.

### Monte Carlos Simulation

- The idea is to use random samples to approximate some quantity.
- The example we will use in this class will be for integral approximation.

#### Context

- $\int_0^1 x^2 dx$ 
  - $\int x^2 dx = \frac{1}{3} x^3 + C$
  - $\int_0^1 x^2 dx = \frac{1}{3} \approx 0.333$
- $x_1, x_2, ..., x_n$
  - $I_N = \frac{1}{N} \sum_{i=1}^N x_i^2$
  - We can generalize this to any function
  - $I_N = \frac{1}{N} \sum_{i=1}^N f(x_i)$
  - $ERR_N = O(\frac{1}{\sqrt{N}})$
    - THis means that the error decreases as we increase the number of samples, but it does so at a rate of $1/\sqrt{N}$, which is relatively slow. To reduce the error by a factor of 10, we would need to increase the number of samples by a factor of 100.

### LCG

- Invented by Lehmer in 1958
- Uses this formula:
  - $X_{n+1} = (aX_n + c) \mod m$
    - $a$ is the multiplier
    - $c$ is the increment
    - $m$ is the modulus
      - if you have m = 100, then the maximum number you can generate is from 0 to 99. when you modulo a number that basically defines when the sequence wraps around. For example If I want my result to be from 1-100 I will use modulo 100 and then add 1 to the result.
    - $X_0$ is the seed

- If you want a float:
  - $U_n = \frac{X_n}{m}$

- If you want repeatable results, you can set the seed to a specific value. For example, if you set the seed to 0, you will get the same sequence of random numbers every time you run the program.

#### Example

- $ m = 9$
- $a = 2$
- $c = 1$

  - $x_0 = 1$
  - $x_1 = (2 \cdot 1 + 1) \mod 9 = 3$
  - $x_2 = (2 \cdot 3 + 1) \mod 9 = 7$
  - $x_3 = (2 \cdot 7 + 1) \mod 9 = 6$
  - $x_4 = (2 \cdot 5 + 1) \mod 9 = 4$
  - $x_5 = (2 \cdot 2 + 1) \mod 9 = 0$
  - $x_6 = (2 \cdot 5 + 1) \mod 9 = 1$
  - And then it will repeat the sequence again

- $x_0$ is the seed. It will generate a random sequence of numbers until it reaches the seed again, at which point it will repeat the sequence. The length of the sequence before it repeats is called the period. In this example, the period is 6 because it takes 6 numbers before it returns to the seed.

- How do we pick the seed? 
  - You want to maximize the period. so if m is 100 you want the period to be 100. 
  

- To get a full period:
  - $gcd(c, m) = 1$
    - $a - 1$ is divisible by all prime factors of $m$
  - $a-1$ is divisble by 4. (Not obvious but important for the full period)
  - If all these conditions are met, then the period will be equal to $m$, this is called a full period.

#### Python Random Seed Implementation

```python
import os

seed = int.from_bytes(os.urandom(8), 'little')
```

- This gets you a random seed from the operating system, which is usually based on some source of entropy like mouse movements, keyboard inputs, or other hardware events. This is a good way to get a random seed that is not predictable.

- Different operating systems maintain a pool of random data in different ways. On linux, one of the sources of randomness is keystrokes. For example on events linux captures a time stamp, and then theres a hashing function that joins those bits to the randomness group. On windows, the randomness is based on a combination of hardware events and other sources of entropy.

- 8 bytes means we are getting 8 bytes of random data. The 'little' means that we are interpreting the bytes in little-endian order, which is a way of ordering the bytes. In little-endian order, the least significant byte is stored first. This is a common way to represent integers in memory. You can also use 'big' which is the opposite of little.

- use this method for seeding in this class.

#### Python LCG Implementation

```python
class LCG:
    def __init__(self, seed):
        self.a = 1664525
        self.c = 1013904223
        self.m = 2**32
        self.state = seed % self.m

    def next_int(self):
        self.state = (self.a * self.state + self.c) % self.m
        return self.state

    def mc_integral_x2(rng: LCG, n_samples:int) -> float:
        total = 0
        for _ in range(n_samples):
            x = rng.next_int()
            total += x*x
        return total/n_samples



TV = 1/3
SEED = 123456789
SAMPLE_SIZES = [100, 1_000, 10_000]

for n in SAMPLE_SIZES:
    rng = LCG(SEED) # Create instance of LCG class with seed of SEED
    estimage = LCG.mc_integral_x2(rng, n)
    error = abs(estimage - TV)
    print(f"Samples: {n}, Estimate: {estimage}, Error: {error}")
```

|n_samples|Estimate      |Error       |
|---------|--------------|------------|
|1000     |   0.319192   |   -0.014141|
|10,000   |   0.3277720  |   -0.005614|
|100,000  |0.331758      |   -0.001576|

- is LCG useless?
  - NO
- Why is it no longer used in cryptography?
  - Because it is not secure..
  - in 1968 it was discovered that LCG has some weaknesses. In 3D space the random numbers that were generated were on parallel hyperplanes. If a hacker knows this they can predict the next number in the sequence so its not actually random.

## Project 1

---

- Scientific analysis project. The coding is negligable compared to the analysis you will be doing

- Effects of hive entrance orientation on honey bee colony activity

- This paper was published in 2023 and it was a study on if the direction of hive affects bee colony activity.

### Tools

- Electronic Scales
  - KG recorded every 5 mins
- Temperature Sensors
  - C recorded every 30 mins

### Findings

- All queens except 2 were replaced between April and December
- The num of hives in each group changed as hives were lost and replaced

- East facing hives were active earlier and later than west facing hives by at least 50 minutes
- East facing hives had lower morning weight loss
- East facing hives had the lowest daily hive weight loss
- East facing hives were about 7 degrees cooler than west facing hives
- Most effects were observed from December to March. This is in arizona.

- Our data will be from dec 2019 - june 2020 dataset.

- We are given 10 hives and a csv file with the data.

- Columns
  - Hive ID
  - direction
  - month
  - day of month
  - year
  - hourofday
  - temp
  - weight

- data_processing.py
  - Loads data and returns Dict[Tuple[int, str], dict]

- test_load_series.py
  - unit test to test the load_series function in data_processing.py

- Implement 2 functions in data_processing.py
  - Read the docstring for each function to understand what it does and how to implement it.

- test_autocorr_synthetic.py
  - Tests your implementations in data_processing.py using synthetic data. You can run this test to check if your implementation is correct before running the test on the real data.

### Models

- We will be using three models to perform analysis with $\alpha = 0.05$:
  - Raw Data
  - ANOVA
  - Linear Regression

### Lags

- We hope to get p(k) < 0.05 for k = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7

### Detrending

- When we test raw data we assume that no deterrministic structures exist

- Detrending removes identifiable deterministic componenets (in this case constant mean, and hour of the day patterns)

- Important to remember that your null hypothesis is gonna be mathematically identical, but scientifically different.

- Raw data will test independance of the full data set. 

- You will be writing reports. There are example reports. He randomly sampled 5 hives and wrote an analysis, your job is the 5 remaining hives.

- In test_autocorr_analysis.py You will answer 5 questions in a docstring.

- You will also write a summary report answering the same 5 questions taking account of all 10 hives.

- You will have 2 weeks to finish this project. (Due on March 7th).

- THIS IS REAL ACTUAL OBSERVED REAL WORLD DATA WE ARE ANALYZING.
- OUR REPORT IS MULTI LINE COMMENTS.
- REPORT GOES ON BOTTOM.

- It's 5 questions per hive. So you will answer all 5 questions 6 different times. 1 for each of the 5 hives, plus 1 for the summary of all 10 hives.
