# CS 3430 - Class 13 - 2/25/26 Notes

## Announcements

* More on random number generation today
* No new homework this week because of our project
* No new homework will be assigned until AFTER spring break.

### Random Number Generators Continued.

* LCG, we talked about last time. Created in 1951
* In 1968 Dr Marsaglio.
* In 2003 Dr. Marsaglio (same guy) proposed a new algorithm that fixes the problem with LCG.
  * XOR shift 32 bits.

#### Symbols you need to know

* $\mathbb{Z}_m$ - integers mod m
* XOR shift 32 domain is 32 bit unsigned integers. So $\mathbb{Z}_{2^{32}}$.
* Imagine a circular counter. You go from 0 $\rightarrow$ 1 $\rightarrow$ 2 $\rightarrow$ 3 $\rightarrow$ ... $\rightarrow$ $2^{32} - 1$.

* Overflow is when you go from $2^{32}-1$ $\rightarrow$ 0. This is the same as going from -1 $\rightarrow$ 0 in signed integers.

* Addition and multiplication are done in modulo 2
  * Example: $1 + 1 = 2(\mod 2) = 0$
  * Example: $1 \cdot 1 = 1(\mod 2) = 1$
* So we are using all 32 bits to represent the number. And because we are doing addition and multiplication in mod 2, we can use XOR and AND to do the same thing.
* BE aware how the bits are counted

#### Vocabulary

* $\mathbb{Z}_m$ - is a ring
  * This means that we have addition and multiplication defined on $\mathbb{Z}_m$ and they satisfy the properties of a ring.
* $\mathbb{F}_m$ - is a field
  * This means that we have addition and multiplication defined on $\mathbb{F}_m$ and they satisfy the properties of a field.
  * A field is a ring with multiplicative inverses. This means that for every non-zero element in the field, there exists an element such that their product is 1.
* Algebraic Structure - A bunch of elements with operations defined in them. 
* This is also a subspace because we have addition and multiplication defined on it. We can also do scalar multiplication on it. So we have a vector space.

* LCG lives in $\mathbb{Z}_m$ and XOR shift lives in $\mathbb{F}_m$.

#### Examples

* $L_k$ - left shift by k bits
* x = 00101101 (45 in decimal)
* x<< 2 = $L_2$ = 10110100 (two bits are shifted to the left and two 0's are added to the right) 

* $R_k$ - right shift by k bits
* x >> 2 = 00001011 (two bits are shifted to the right and two 0's are added to the left)

* Trick - Delete two digits on one end and add two 0's on the other end. This is the same as shifting.

* Formula: $x >> k \equiv \lfloor{\frac{x}{2^k}}\rfloor$ and $x << k = x \cdot 2^k$

---

1. If you have ($b_31, b_30, ..., b_0$) and xor it to ($c_{31}, c_{30}, ..., c_0$) you get ($b_{31} \oplus c_{31}, b_{30} \oplus c_{30}, ..., b_0 \oplus c_0$) its like a dot product but instead of multiplication we are doing exclusive or and instead of addition we are doing exclusive or. So we are doing a linear transformation on the bits.

2. Seed
    * $X_0 \neq 0$
    * First iteration: $X_0 \oplus L_{13}(X_0)$ these come from trial and error ( they are all prime numbers)
    * Second iteration: $X_1 \oplus R_{17}(X_1)$
    * Third iteration: $X_2 \oplus L_5(X_2)$
    * Once you have this set up then the subsequent iterations are just $X_{n+1} = X_n \oplus L_{13}(X_n) \oplus R_{17}(X_n) \oplus L_5(X_n)$
    * YOu can use truth tables to help you do this shit.

#### Implementations (Python)

```python

x = 45

bin(x) # Give me the binary representation of x (0b101101)

x = x << 2
print(str(x)) # 180
bin(x) # 0b10110100
```

* What is the right way of doing this? Through BITMASKING

#### Bitmasking 

* 0xFFFFFFFF - This is a bitmask that has all bits set to 1 in a 32-bit integer.
  * Each F represents 1111. So, this is 1111_1111_1111_1111_1111_1111_1111_1111

```python
0xFFFFFFFF = 2**32 - 1 # Returns TRUE
```

* If we do x & 0xFFFFFFFF.
  * You take the bit string of 32 bits and compute the logical AND witht eh lowest bits that constitute X. Everything else will be desgarded so you will get 32 bits PERIOD
  * E.G. if you do y & 0xFF you will use the lowest 8 bits of y.

* Remember if you do:
  * 0xFFFF...F(K Fs)
  * X & 0xFFFF...F(K Fs) is mathematically the same as X mod 2**k

* So, force X to be less than 2^k but geq to 0
  * $0 \leq X < 2^k$

* How do you force python to tell you what the bits are?

```python
format(x & 0xFFFFFFFF, '032b') # This will give you the binary representation of x in 32 bits
```

* How is this different than bin(x)?

```python
bin(x) # This will give you the binary representation of x but it will not be in 32 bits and it will have a 0b prefix
```

```python
x = 2**31
print(str(x)) # 2,147,483,648

# BUTTTT

x = x << 1 # bit shift left by 1
print(str(x)) # 4,294,967,296

```

* THis means shifting the bits left by 1 is the same as multiplying by 2.
* THIS IS BAD because there was no wrap around to 0. We need to use bitmasking to force it to wrap around. we could use modulo too but that is slightly more expensive than bitmasking. We will use numpy to do this because it has built in support for unsigned integers.

```python
import numpy as np

x = np.uint32(2**31) # This will create a 
# 32-bit unsigned integer with the value of 2^31
# which is 2,147,483,648 WHICH IS THE MAXIMUM VALUE FOR A 32-BIT SIGNED INTEGER
x = (x << 1) & np.uint32(0xFFFFFFFF) 
# This will shift the bits left by 1 and then apply the 
# bitmask to force it to wrap around to 0 if it exceeds 2^32 - 1
# If tou don't apply the bitmask numpy will cast it to a 64 bit unsighed integer and it will not wrap around to 0
print(str(x)) # It wraps around to 0
```

```python

x = 1

try:
    while True:
        x = x << 1_000_000
except MemoryError:
    print("Memory error occurred")
```

* Python does not have infinite memory guys.

```python
chunks = []
try:
    while True:
        chunks.append(bytearray(100_000_000))
except MemoryError:
    print("Memory error occurred")
```

* This create an array of 100 million bytes and keeps appending it to the list until it runs out of memory. This is a way to test how much memory you have. LOL THIS IS SO DUMB

* Make sure you force the memory capacity to be something you can live with
* Prototyping in python is dangerous because theres an illusion that you have infinite memory. You need to be careful or it can cost you, for example it can cause corrupt data.

#### Same example in c

```c

#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdict.h>

int main(){
    uint32_t x = 1U << 31; // This will create a 32-bit unsigned integer with the value of 2^31
    x = x << 1;
    printf("%u\n", x); // This will print 0 because it wraps around to 0
    return 0;
}
```

* This will print 0 because it wraps around to 0. In C, if you shift a 32-bit unsigned integer left by 1 and it exceeds the maximum value of 2^32 - 1, it will wrap around to 0. This is because of how unsigned integers work in C.
* It does NOT work like this in python so don't try it, use what professor taught.