# CS3430 - Class 14 - 3/2/26 Notes

## Announcements

- You are allowed to overcomplicate your code. As long as the unit test pass. You can have 4 nested for loops instead of a numpy one liner if you want. If you want a challenge.

### Review from last time

- Lecture 13 talked about LCG.
- LCG is a linear congruential generator. It is a type of pseudorandom number generator that uses a linear equation to generate a sequence of numbers. The equation is:
  - $X_{n+1} = (aX_n + c) \mod m$

### MSWS

- $\mathbb{Z}_m$ - integers mod m
- $\mathbb{F}_2$ - {0, 1} with arith. mod 2
- $\mathbb{F}_2^{32}$ - All 32 bit vectors.

- XOR Shift32 lives in $\mathbb{F}_2^{32}$

- X = x & 0xFFFFFFFF

#### 32 Bit Masking

- $\mathbb{Z}_{2^{64}}$; m = $2^{64}$ - This is what we will be working with when we do 64 bit masking.

#### Middle Square Weyl Sequence

- The original idea "allegedly" came from John Von Neumann in the mid 1940s.
- His idea was:
    1. Take a number
    2. Square the number
    3. Use the middle digits.
- MSWS is like a modern repair method.

- Example:
  - In Decimal, leading 0s do not matter.
  - They matter, but they do not change the value of the number. So 0001 is the same as 1.
    1. Take 0100 = 100.
    2. Square it: 100^2 = 10_000
    3. add it up to 8 digits
        - 00010000
    4. Take the middle 4 digits: 0100

- Tricks:
  - squaring
  - Weyl Sequence - does not degenerate.

- Recurrences
  - $x = x^2 + w$ ($\mod 2^{64}$)
  - $w = w + s$ ($\mod 2^{64}$)

- Whats a Weyl Sequence?
  - $W_{n+1} = W_n + s$ ($\mod 2^{64}$)
  - $s$ is an odd constant
    - Odd as in divisible by 2
    - Not Odd as in strange
  - $W_n$ is your seed.

- In n steps:
  - $w_n = w_0 + ns$ ($\mod 2^{k}$)
  - This is the same as saying $ns \equiv 0$ ($\mod 2^{k}$)
  - $2^k$ evenly devides into $ns - 0$.

- If $s$ is odd, $2$ is not a factor of s, so $2^k$ must be a factor of $n$.

```python
self.x = seed & 0xFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
self.w = 0
self.s = 0xb5ad4eceda1ce2a9 # One of the recommended seeds. 
## This number is 13,091,206,342,165,455,529 in decimal.
## It is odd, and it is a large number. 
```

- The above code is the initilization of an MSWS generator. It takes a seed, and it sets x to be the seed masked to 64 bits. It sets w to 0, and it sets s to be a large odd number.

```python
self.x = ((self.x * self.x) + (self.w + self.s)) & 0xFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
self.w = (self.w + self.s) & 0xFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
```

- Implementation of the MSWS generator. Make sure you mask to 64 bits!

- x = [63, ..., 48](Top 16 bits)[47, ..., 16](middle 32 bits)[15, ..., 0](Bottom 16 bits)

- We need to extract the middle 32 bits.
- We need to drop the first 16 bits, shift right by 16 bits, and then mask to 32 bits to drop the last 16 bits.
- The code for this that keeps the middle 32 bits is:

```python
(self.x >> 16) & 0xFFFFFFFF
```

- You are not just shifting the bits, you are also masking!! so you lose the first 16 bits via the shift, and you lose the last 16 bits via the mask, thus ending with the middle 32 bits.

- This brings MSWS to an end. It does complete a whole cycle. Considered a little stronger than LCG and XOR Shift.

### PCG - Permuted Congruential Generator, MODERN RNG (NumPy)

- A playoff of LCG64.

- Its like LCG but we're masking differently.
- 64 bit LCG, pernute the output.

- Whats the recurrence look like?
    1. Use a 64 bit LCG
        - $X_{n+1} = (aX_n + c) \mod m$ where $m = 2^{64}$
        - $a = 6,364,136,223,846,793,005$
        - If you returned here, this would be a 64 bit LCG, but we need to permute the output now
    2. Mix low and high bits.
        - $x = ((x >> 18) \oplus x) >> 27$ ($\oplus$ is bitwise XOR)
        - Where do these 2 constants come from?
        - Don't know. Don't worry about it. They are just magic numbers that work well.
        - If you are interested look up NIST SP 800-22, which is a document that talks about random number generators and their properties. It is a very long document, but it is very informative. (IM NOT GONNA READ IT BRUH)

    3. Rotate (depends on high bits)
        - $r = x >> 59$ (top 5 bits)
        - `rotate_right(x,r)`
          - What does this function do?
          - $(x >> r) | (x << (32-r))$


### RNG you've now seen

1. LCG32,64,128,...
2. XOR Shift32,64,128,...
3. MSWS - Non linear.
4. PCG uses LCG64 and then permutes the output.

**DO NOT USE ANY OF THESE FOR CRYPTOGRAPHY. THEY WILL BE CRACKED JUST LIKE WHAT I DID TO YOUR MOM LAST NIGHT !!!!**
