## Binary Search Trees

Left is lower right is higher, doesn't necessarily have to be in order


### Removing a leaf in a BST

Removing a node with one child is easy, remove the node, replace it with child

If the node has two kids its more work, Internal node is replaced with inorder successor (the thing thats the next biggest)

to find the inorder successor go to te right and findMin 
```java

findMin(t.right).element
```

BST 

best case - O(logn) 

Worse case - O(n



## AVL Trees

Named after Adelson, Velsky, and Landis

Approaches to Balancing
* Don't balance - may end up with nodes very deep
* Strict balance - The tree must always be balanced as perfectly as possible
* Pretty good balance - only a little out of balance
* Adjust as you insert or delete - self adjusting, must be efficient or its not worth it

AVL Trees could desire an almost complete tree after ever operation 

-tree is full except last level/lower right

The height of the right and the height of the right can only differ by at most 1 if they differ than do a rotation dawg!


Every node is goinng to store a balance factor

The idea is you lean up along the way. doesn't change complexity

### Insert

Each node has the height, and balance factor.

Balance Factor = hleft - hright

Empty height = -1

Insert operations may cause tree to become inbalanced. May require single or double rotation.

### Height of tree
you can just ask the node what it's height is because it stores it in AVL tree. We don't have to traverse to a leaf.


```java
private int height(AVLNode < AnyType>t){
    return t == null ? -1 : t.height;
}
```

Pledge: Never follow a null reference.

How to balance code example:

