# Networks

The internet is basically a bunch of interconnected networks

### OSI Model
* **Open Systems Interconnections**
* This is a way of thinking about how the internet or a local network works
* Its divided into 7 layers
	1. Layer 1 - **Physical Layer** - The physical hardware transmitting the data/bits. Cables, hubs, WIFI
	2. Layer 2 - **Data Link Layer** - "Hop to Hop" layer. Defines the format of the data on the network. Switches, Routers, Network Card
	3. Layer 3 - **Network Layer** - End to End layer. IP Addresses
	4. Layer 4 - **Transport Layer** - Actually transporting the data, the format, the rules. Transmits the data using protocols like TCP and UDP
	5. Layer 5 - **Session Layer** - Maintains connections and is responsible for controlling ports and session, usually implemented by OS
	6. Layer 6 - **Presentation Layer** - Ensures that data is in a usable format. This is where encryption happens too. Usually implemented by the OS
	7. Layer 7 - **Application Layer** - Human computer interaction layer. This is where you build your web application. 
**THIS MAKES UP THE OSI LAYER**


### IP Addresses
* Anything that can connect to the network and send or receive messages is called a host
* IP addresses are a way to identify that specific computer on a network
* Every computer has a unique address
* Can be divided by departments
* Last part of the IP address is the **Host** Address (E.G 10.40.10.**205**)
* This is how the router figures out where the computers are

### Ports
* Often time IP addresses are accompanied by a PORT
	* e.g. 10.109.184.1:8080
* This tells the router what receives the message
* The computer has a lot of ports
* This is mostly managed by the operating system
**IMPORTANT PORTS**
* HTTP Typically is sent to port 80
* HTTPS typically sent to port 443
* IF you make an HTTP(S) request without the port then the operating system will automatically send it to port 80 or 443. This is a special case, everything else you need to be specific. 


