# Restful Routing

### What is restful routing?
* Restful routing is an architectural style for designing web applicationt hat adhere to the principles of Representational State Transfer (REST).
### What is REST
* Rest is an approcach to building networked application that rely on HTTP methods and follows a set of conventions to create well organized, scalable and maintainable APIS
* RESTful routing incolves defining different enpoints ina web application to perform various CRUD (Create, Read, Update, Delete) operations onr esources (data entities) using the standard HTTP methods (GET, POST, PUT, DELETE).
* Each endpoint corresponds to a specific resource and action
* here is a list of HTTP methods used in RESTful routing:
	* GET: Used to retrieve data from a server
	* Post: Used to create new resources on a server, 
	* PUT: Used to update existing resources on the server.
	* DELETE: Used to remove resources from the server

* In restful fourting the HTTP method and the url path define the operation to be performed on a resource. The server's response typically includes the HTTP status code indicating the result of the operation (200 = success, 404 = not found, 201 = created, etc.)
**RESTful routing simplifies API design**

#Migrations

### What are migrations

* Migrations are a way to update your databases
* Running the make migrations is how you start this
```python
python manage.py makemigrations
```
* Will generate the code to make migrations for changes to your database
* After creating the migrations you need to run them using
```python
python manage.py migrate
```
* This will run the migrations to your database


# Updating Database

### Using Javascript to update Database

```js
for(let checkbox of document.querySelectorAll("input[type=checkbox]")) {
	    checkbox.addEventListener('change', (e) => {
	    	        // TODO make a fetch request to update the todo
	    	            });}
	    })
}
```
* This event listener is going to listen for changes to the checkboxes.
* When referencing things from the HTML we use - because HTML is case insensitive
* In the Javascript though that is actually converted to be camelcase
* Example:
```js
for(let checkbox of document.querySelectorAll("input[type=checkbox]")) {
	    checkbox.addEventListener('change', (e) => {
	    	        // todo-Id == todoID
	    	        // todoId = todoid
	    	        // HTML is case insensitive, so in the HTML use dashes not camel case. A little confusing but whatever. 
	    	        // In the HTML, it is data-todo-id not todoId
	    	        console.log(e.target.dataset.todoId);
	    });}
```
* We are only use post and get request to send and recieve data in Django!
* This is restful routing!

### Other information to know (FROM QUIZZES):
* What does the term rendering mean?
	* Reading the bytes of a file and converting them into a python string to send in the response
* Forms must have a name attriobute to send information to a server
* When buttons are in a form they submit the form to the server by default
* Template tag in Django Language is {% %}
