# Models of Relationships
* The only thing you can store in fields is primitive data
### One to One Relationship
* Two fields are related to each other one to one. Just a single line between the two
* For example, a user and profile a user has one profile, and a profile has one user
* We can have a property on user that has a profileID
### One to many Relationship
* One course, can have many assignments
* Line from course to assignment, but the trailing end of the line splits off. Many assignments. Or 0 or more assignments.
### Many To Many Relationship
* Many courses, many Users
* THis doesn't actually work
* IF you want to implement a many to many relationship you have to add a bridge table
### Bridge Table
* Usually name it the two fields name together (eg UserCourse)
* The attributes that go on the table is the User ID and the Course ID
* That is how you can make a many to many relationship betcause the bridge is a one to many relationship with both sides

# Foreign Key Constraint
* A foreign Key COnstraint in a data base is a mechanism that establishes a relationship between two tables and ensures referential integrity
* It is used to maintain consistency and data itegrity when data in one table refers to data in another table 

### Key Concepts of Foreign Key Constraints
* Tables: In a relational database the data is organized into tables each representing a specific entity or concept
* Primary Key: A primary key is a unique identifier for each row in the table. It uniquely identifies each row in the table
* Foreign Key: A foreign key is a column or a set of colu,ns in one table that refers to the primary keyu of another table. It is what creates the relationship between two tables
* Parent Table: THis is the table that contains the primary key column
* Child Table: This is the table containing the foreign key that points to the primary key in the parent table
* Referential Integrity: Referential integrity ensures that a relationship between tables remain consistent and valid. 
* Cascade Options: Forein Key Constraints can contain some cascade options that specifies what happens to related records in the child table when a corresponding record in the parent table is update or deleted.
	* CASCADE: When a parent record is updated or deleted all related child recoreds are automatically updated or deleted as well
	* Restrict: Prevents the update or delete action on the parent record if there are related child records
	* Set null: Sets the foreign key column in the child table to NULL when the corresponding parent record is deleted or updated
	* NO ACTION: Similar to RESTRICt, it prevents teh update or delete action on the parent record if there are related child records. 
* **FOREIGN KEY CONSTRAINTS** PLAY A CRUTIAL ROLE in maintaining Data Integrity and ensuring consistency in a relational database.

# Implementing Relationships in Django
* Django makes implementing pretty easy
* You have to define the relationship in your model.py
* Think of the models in terms of the actial relationship
* Example of one to one relationship defined in model.py:
	```python
	class Profile(models.Model)
	id = models.BigAutoField(primary_key = True)
	notifications_enabled = models.BooleanField(default=True)
	user = models.OneToOneField("User", on_delete=models.CASCADE) ## Almost always use CASCADE on delete. So if the user gets deleted it will delete the profile from the database
 	```
* Creating a one to many relationship in Django:
```python
	class Profile(models.Model):
	id = models.BigAutoField(primary_key = True)
	name = models.TextField()
	description = models.TextField()
	due_data = models.TextField()
	course = models.ForeignKey("Course", on_delete = models.CASCADE) ## THIS IS THE FOREIGN KEY MENTIOPNED IN PREVIOUS SECTION
```
* That implements the one to many relationship between course and assignment
* For a one to many relationship
* YOu only want to declare the relationship on one model.
```python
	class Course(models.Model)
	id = models.BigAutoField(primary_key=True)
	name = models.TextField()
	users = models.ManyToManyField("User") # do not need to specify deletion behavior
```
* AFter specifying run the migrations and then migrate
* It will implement the bridge table stuff for us.
* You can test these models before building an actual application by running a python shell
* Run `python manage.py shell`
* THis launches an interactive shell in the context of your application.


### OTHER THINGS TO KNOW

