# Networking Protocols



### TCP
**TCP is a connection oriented protocol. It establishes a reliable and ordered data transfer stream bnetwseen two devices**
  * TCP is reliable and ensures all data packets are delivered and in the correct order. if any packets are lost it will resend them
  * TCP uses checksums to verify data itegrity
  * TCP has flow control to manage data exchange rate
  * TCP since it is connection oriented means it favors reliability over speed


### UDP
**UDP is a connectionless protocol, which means it does not establish a connection before sending data. Instead, it sends data packats to the destination without checking if it has been recieved or in the correct order**
* UDP  has no reliability guarantee. Packets may be lost, arrive out of order, or diplicated. It does not preform any retransmission like tcp does
* No error checking
* No flow control.
* Faster than TCP as it prioritizing sending and not connection
* Does not require a connection

### When to choose TCP VS UDP?
* TCP is chosen when reliability is crutial, like file transfer, emails, web browsing, database acces, etc.
* UDP is chosen when low overhead is preferred. Applications with real time requirments like video, online gaming benefit from the speed and low overhead of UDP. less of a need for reliability

### More TCP
* We will onlyt use TCP in this class
* TCP uses a 3 step process to ensure both computers are in agreement
  1. The sender (client) sends a connection request with information about the computer (IP, port)
  2. The reciever (server) sends and aknowledgment to the port that the client specified indicating that it is ready to recieve
  3. The client sends back another aknowledgment that  it recieved the servers aknowledgment 


### Python programming

Socket module for python
```python
 import socket
```
create an instance of the socket class

Server
```python
import socket

with socket.socket(socket.AF_INET, socket.SOCK_STREAM) as s: ## AF_INET is the address family, you will use that mostly., Then you will put the protocol. SOCK_STREAM means TCP
    s.bind(("127.0.0.1", 5000)) # plug it into a socket with the bind function. 2 parts, 1 host, 2 port
    s.listen()
    print("Waiting for connecting...")
     # waits for an incoming connection
    conn, addr = s.accept()
    print(f"Connection recieved at {addr}")
    
    

```

Client

```python
import socket

with socket.socket(socket.AF_INET, socket.SOCK_STREAM) as s:
    s.connect((127.0.0.1,5000)) # send a message to this port on the computer
    



```