# HTTP Protocol

### HTTP
* TCP doesn't have rules that govern the data you can send. Since all that is sent over a network is just bytes of data it is important for the client software and server software to agree upon a common language that canbe used to interpret the data. HTTP protocol is a language clients and servers use to communicate with each other


### How it works

**CLIENT**
* The client needs to send a UTF-8 encoded String
* SHape of the string:
* `<verb> <uri> <version>` `Header-1: my value`
* you can also have lists of data
* `Header-2: 1,2,3`
* Everything after the header is called the body, it can contain any type of information
* There is a header called the content-type header, which tells the server what type of content it is
* `Cintent-Type: text/html` `<h1> Hello, World </h1>`
### Start Line
**There is also a start line that looks like this**
* `<version> <status> <reason>`
```
GET /index.html HTTP/1.1
  Accept: text/html
  cookie: sessionID=1234dfjkldfjop;
  admin=true&includeuser=true
    
  Example response:
  HTTP/1.1 200 Ok
  Content-Type: text/html
  Content-Length: 21
    
  <h1> Hello, world</h1>
  ```


## REVIEW

### Vocab:
1. TCP - Transmission Control Protocol is a connection oriented protocol. It establishes a reliable and ordered data transfer stream between two devices
2. UDP - User Datagram Protocol is a connectionless protocol, which means it does not establish a connection before sending data. Instead, it sends data packats to the destination without checking if it has been recieved or in the correct order
   3. Prioritizes speed over reliability
4. HTTP -a Hypertext Transfer Protocol is an application-layer request for the web. Basically rules that govern the type of data being sent from a server to a client
   5. Has methods (GET, POST, PUT, Etc) status codes (2xx/3xx/4xx/5xx)
   6. runs over TCP (only use tcp in this class)
   7. 4 parts of an HTTP request
      8. Start line, headers, mandatory blank line, body
7. Client - The initiator, the sender. sends requests to the server
8. Server - The responder. Listens on a port and accepts connections and responds
9. Socket - an OS endpoint for network IO
   10. Identified by IP + port(+protocol) after connect and accept you get a dedicated socket to read/write
11. Protocol - rules for communications. Message formats, etc
12. OSI model - A model for describing the various parts of a computer network

### Review Questions:
1. What are the differences between tcp and udp protocols. why use one over the other?
   2. TCP is connection oriented. Its more reliable and establishes a reliable connection before communicating. UDP is connectionless meaning there doesn't actually need to be a connection and it'll send data regardless. it prioritizes speed. TCP is used when communication is crucial, like email. UDP is used when speed is crucial, like video games
3. What kind of data can I send over a network
   4. based on the protocols you are using you can send any types of data text, files, etc. it must be transferred by turning them into bytes howerver
5. What is the purpose of a protocol?
   6. to establish rules for communication
7. What does a socket do?
   8. It basically is the OS's way of establishing the connection between 2 devices allowing you to read and write betweent hem
   9. The socket python module binds software to a port on your computer
