# Random Access Memory, Registers, and Counters 

### Announcements:
* First exam, everything up to friday last week
* No class next friday I think due to the exam
* There will be reviews
* Asisgnment #3 will be pushed back and anyone who got it in already will get bonus points YIPPEEE
* When you send emails don't say "hey"

## RAM
* A ram chip in simplest form is just a bunch of registers together
* A sequence of n addressable, w-bit registers
* Width, typically is 16, 32, 64, 128 bits
* The cpu we build we be 16 bit
* Question: Supposed that the ram size is n=8 registers. What should the value of K be? k=log2n. Log2(8).

## Registers

### How to read a register
* set address = i
* probe out
* out always emits the value of RAM[i]
* If load == 0, the RAM maintains its state
* If load == 1, the RAM[address] is set to the value of the input
* the loaded value will be emitted by output from the next time-step(cycle) onward
* Only one ram register is selected, all other registers are not affected

### How to write to a register
* Set address = i
* set input = v
* set load = 1
* result RAM[i] > V

### Why RAM?
* Any randomly selected register can be accessed "instantly" in one clock cycle. (if you know the address of the register you can access it immediately as you don't have to search for it

### Register File
* A MIPS CPU Interacts with two main forms of memeory:
	* RAM
		* Stores a huge amount of information, way more than registers
		* Slower than registers
	* Registers (In a register File)
		* Stores 32 Registers
		* Much quicker to access
		* used for performing calculations
	* Ports
		* Read register 1: address of 1st register you want to read
		* Read Register 2: address of 2nd register you want to read
		* Write register: Address of register you want to modify
		* Write Data: The data you want to write to the "Write register"
		* RegWrite: Whether to enable or disable writing
		* Read data1: The output of the register specified by Read Register 1
		* Read Data 2: The output of the register specified by Read Register 2
* Having these forms of memory allows us to do calculations faster. Doing it with all ram would make it slower. Using register files makes it go much faster
* Registers are "cache". One of the cpu registers acts as a "program counter"
## Counters

### Program Counter
* The computer needs to keep track of which instruction should be fetched and executed next
* This is done using a register called the Program Counter (PC)
* The PC is used to store the address of the next instruction that should be fetched and executed next

* **Basic Operations of PC**
	* Increment: PC++ - Facilitates next instruction
	* Load: PC=N - Facilities jumping to another register or instruction
	* Reset: PC=0 - Facilitates fetching the very first instruction
* Load is the go to register operation
### Logic of Program Counter
* T = current time
```python
if reset(t): 
	out(t+1)=0
else if load(t):
	out(t+1) = in(t)
else if inc(t):
	out(t+1) = out(t)+1
else:
	out(t+1)=out(t)
```
* To read a value, probe out. use the program counter
* To increment, assert inc. Set other control bits to 0
* To load, set in to v, asser load, sett the other control bits to 0
* To reset, assert reset, and set the other control bits to 0.
* There is a register in the program counter that is keeping track. 
* There is a register designated for the counter.
```
x=2
tempx=0
y=1

tempx=x
x=y
y=tempx
```
* To swap a value you need 3 variables
* Remember that!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!1

### Things to Remember
* The program counter does not count time
* Incrementing is very simple, its just "do the next step"



