# Review for Exam
### Notes About Exam
* You are allowed to use the slides
* YOu are not allowed notes
* Try to remember where to find critical things in the slides
* Download the slides before starting the exam

### Boolean Algebra (Chapter 1.2)

* Know how to represent truth tables
* Know the shorthand operators and simplify expressions
* Memorize the Boolean Laws (On chapter 1.2)
* Simplify complex boolean expressions
* NAND gate is most important because you can create every other chip with NAND
* You might be given a circuit and be asked what the operation is, or what the truth table is


### Logic Gates

* Remembr what logic gates look like
* Remember what each gate does
* XOR vs OR (Exclusive vs Regular)
* Not gates normally represent negation (NOR, NAND)
* Converting Truth tables to boolean Expressions
* Convert boolean expressions to logic gates/circuits
* There is a question that says here is a truth table, from the truth table create a gate.
* Know how to go from an expression to a truth table
	* Create a column for every variable

### Unit 2
* Know how to convert from decimal to binary and from binary to decimal
* Differences between base 10 and base 2
* Positional Notation.10 to the power of the positon  Go from x10^0, x10^1, etc starting in the ones spot. so 1 x 1000 + 1x100 + 1x10 + 1x1, etc
* Reverse from base 2 to base 10. 2 to the power of the position. 8x1+4x2+2x2+1x1
* From decimal to binary ask yourself "how many times does _ fit into _" and keep going down the line subtracting the value from itself.

### Binary
* Binary addition is the same as regular addition except you carry the one on 2 instead of 10. ez pz
* With one extra digit itd be overflow, ignore it.
* INvalid number LOLLLLLLLLLLL
* Include the caryouts when looking at the gates

### Adder/Increments
* Half Adder - Single bit addition between 2 bits, Remember the truth table (sum, and carry)
* Full adder - Single bit addition between 2 bits that carys the 1 
* Incremenet - incremenets the value by 1
* inc16 - Same thing but 16 bit
### Signed integers
* Signed integers - left most bit (MSB) represents the sign
* You will be told in the exam "assume its signed" or "assume its unsigned"
* KNow how to use 2s complement. Method 2 is better
* Method 2 is the MSB is times by -position ex = 1110 = 1x-8 + 1x4 + 1x2 + 0x1 = -2
* When you are subtracting 2 positive numbers, just convert the second number using 2s complement into a negative number then add them together

### Bias Bits
* When it comes to fixed point you have to know how to convert it to a real number. Everything to the right seperately, and everything to the left seperately and then combine them
* Moving from decimal to binary, essentially doing the same thing as before for each side. (3.1 slide 10 explains this perfectly)

### Floating Point (3.2)
* MSD is most significant digit, left most digit. biggest number got the biggest MSD, works with signed and unsigned.

### IEEE754
* REMEMBER HOW TO CONVERT TO IEEE754
	1. First convert to scientific notation
	2. We need the sign, the fraction, and the exponenet 
	3. Format:
		* float 32 bit -  1st is sign, 8 is biased-127, next 23 is the **Mantissa** 
		* YOu represent 0 by 0000000000000000000000000
		* You represent infinity by sign11111111111000000000000000000000000000
		* If the 8 is all 1s and the 23 is not, that is NOT a number dawg
		
* BIASED-127
	1. Add N to Decimal Number (N=127 for 8 bit)
	2. Convert result as unsigned
