# Test Review #2

### IEEE754 Review
* On the test you may be asked to work with a modified version of IEEE754. 
* For example, it may ask you have a system with 1 sign bit, 3 biased exponent bits, so you would subtract 3 rather than 127 to get the exponenet. and 4 mantissa bits.
* Know how to do this, I know there is a quiz question on this so try and find it and study it
* On the fraction part (Mantissa) instead of multiplying by 2^0, and 2^1 you go x2^-4, x2^-3, x2^-2, up to x2^-1. or nx0.5, nx0.025, etc
* Remember anything following a 1111111111 in the exponent is not a real number. can't do it. Largest exponenet is 11111110, unless its 1111111 followed by 00000000 then its infinity.
* All zeroes, 0000000000000000000000000 = 0



## Section 3.3 

### ASCII
* Ascii is how computers display information to a user
* Unicode gives you more values than ascii gives us 65,000 chars, 16 bit

### Latches
* Latches hold a value. 
	* Or Latch
		* Holds a value but no way to reset it to 0. An or gate with the output of the or coming back into the or gate with the in	
	* SR Latch
		* A more advanced OR latch with a Set and Reset buttons. Q is the output. !Q is the complement of Q
	* Gated SR Latch
		* An SR with an enable button to enable or disable allowing us to set Q
		* If they are all 1 its invalid
	* D Latch
		* Extends the Gated SR Latch with one setinput using two AND gates
		* When Q is high: signal is on (Bit=1)


### Edge Detection
* To help us put things in sync we use a rising edge detector
	* Looks silly but its not, put it with a D latch to make a
### D Flip Fop

* A D latch with a rising edge detector along with a clock helps us to put our componenents and executions in sync
* You only have 1 bit d flip fop so for 4 bits you need 4 of them. 
* Because D flip flop is rising edge we only listen when the clock goes up. If clock is high then q is 1, if clock is down then q=0
* WATCH THE VIDEO      BROCHACHO YOU NEED TO PASS THIS EXAMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMM

# Key Things to Remember
### Things you need to know for sure for the exam
* Ascii and Unicode
* Remember what the or latch is and how we build up to the SR, Gates, and D latch.
* KNow what the limitation of each latch is and what we are adding to each upgrade
* There are no questions on ram or registers
* Have to know what an Adder, Half Adder, Carry adder, Full adder looks like
* Have to know what the different gates look like
* Have to know what their truth tables are
* Have to know how to read truth tables and interpret them
* May be givien a circuit and asked what it does
* What an ALU circuit looks like !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
* There will be slides available on the exam
* There will be a study guide prepared for you.
* KNow the difference between Fixed point and floating point (IEEE754) and how to convert them.
