# ALU Introduction

### ALU
* The ALU is made up of Arithmetic and Logic Units (AL)\
  * Arithmetic - Add Subtract, Multiply, Divide
  * Logic Units - AND, OR, Compare
* Howq we decide what we do is through a multiplexer
  * If we have A, B and Op and an output
  * when Op is 0 the result is A
  * when Op is 1 the result is B
  * We can build this using 2 and gates, an or gate, and a not gate.
  * THis is a one bit multiplexer
* ALU 1 bit logic unit
  * The logic unit depends on the AND and OR gates to implement AND and OR operations. 
  * Same as previous, when Op is 1 result is A AND B
  * when Op is 0 the result is A OR B
  * THis can be done with an AND gate, an or gate, a multiplexer
* Now we add the arithmetic into the ALU by adding the + operation
  * If we get a symbol of 00 the output will be A and B, 01 A OR B, 10 A+B, 11 undefined.
  * We increase the size of our operator. we need 2 bits to represent these states
  * We use an or gate, and gate, and an adder, multiplexer, and a not gate.

### How do we represent REAL numbers?
* We have been talking about integers, but these don't represent real numbers
* There is an infinite number of values we have to represent 
* We will never be able to represent all possible numbers. 
* every number base has an unrepresentable real numbers
* What we do is select one place to be the decimal. we can go 2^-1, 2^-2 and 2^-3 to the right of the number
* converting number into binary with decimal is the same but when we get to the decimal we start at 0.5 and half it each bit we go
* **Example**
  * 0.3 = 0.010011.....


### Practice
The ALU does not handle floating point operations

**3 BIT ALU CONTROL MAPPING:**
* 000 - A AND B
* 001 - A OR B
* 010 - A + B
* 011 - A AND NOT B
* 100 - A AND !B
* 101  - A-B
* 111 - A<B